[THEME MUSIC]
>>GREGG BRADEN: Hello,
my name is Gregg Braden.
I'd like to welcome you to
this all-new presentation
of "The Divine Matrix"
bridging time, space, miracles,
and belief.
In the last episode
of this program,
we saw how a 3,000-year-old
map of time holds the key
to what's possible in the
world as well as our lives.
In this episode, we'll cross
the traditional boundaries
that separate the physics
and biology in the past
to reveal the superhuman
potential of what is now being
recognized as an
internal technology
and how we can use our
inner technology to bypass,
to hack the limits of what we
believe was possible for us
in the past.
A new school of thought suggests
that consciousness informs
itself through its creation,
through its art, music, books,
and movies.
With this idea in
mind, when we look
at the themes of some of
the most popular movies
of our time, what
are those movies
telling us about ourselves?
If consciousness is
informing us of something
that we need to know about
ourselves through the things
that we create to remind
ourselves of ourselves,
what are those films telling us?
Well, examples include
the hugely popular movies
like "The Matrix," for
example, or "Avatar,"
or the movie "Inception."
What are films like
these saying to us?
What part of our reality
are they reminding us of?
Well, if we look at the common
themes, they'll give us a clue.
As different as they
are from one another,
each of these movies is
suggesting, number one,
that there is a world that
exists we simply cannot see
from our limited perspective.
But this world influences
our everyday lives.
Number two, we're told that
we're limited in our lives
only until we wake
up to the parameters
of this unseen world.
Number three, they're telling
us that everyone has the ability
to do just that, to
wake up and to transcend
the limits of their
lives that begin
with the events in the world
that we can't even see.
The success of a recent movie--
the 2017 movie "Arrival--"
is another beautiful
example of what I mean here.
And it opens the door
to precisely what I want
to talk about in this episode.
The theme of the
"Arrival" is so powerful,
it may be one of the most
powerful, underrated,
and perhaps hopeful messages
seen in modern times.
Because beyond the theme of
the ETs, and of the conflict,
and UFOs, and the
special effects,
what the movie is saying to
us is that there is a message.
And the message is
very, very simple.
The message says
that the language
that we use in
our everyday lives
determines the way our
brain connects the neurons
and in turn, the way
that we think and even
what we think about.
I'm going to let you think
about what I just said.
This movie is suggesting
somehow that the words
that we use to communicate
day in and day out--
they are more than simply
words, that they actually
are directly linked to
the neurons in our brain.
Now, if you've ever thought
about the power of just being
able to speak, I'd
like to share with you
just how potent that
ability is unto itself.
And that will lead us into the
power of the language itself.
When we speak, when we say
the words to convey what
it is that we're thinking
and feeling in our lives,
what we're really
doing is a series
of steps that begins with
one of the most intimate acts
that we could ever imagine.
We invite into the deepest
recesses of our bodies
the breath of life from the
world beyond our bodies.
We breathe in what is
called the sacred breath.
We breathe it into our
bodies, and we draw
it deep into our diaphragm.
And once that breath
is in the diaphragm,
we begin to massage that breath.
With our diaphragm,
with the muscles
in our diaphragm in
a very precise wave,
we flutter the diaphragm
just the right way
to now direct the air
back from where it just
came, back through the passages,
over the muscles in our throat
that vibrate and undulate in
just the right way at just
the right time to create
the acoustic vibrations that
allow what we were thinking
to be emitted from our body,
from our mouth, back
into the air around us
as messages that
become precisely that,
the messages that
are interpreted
through the eardrums
of the people
that we're speaking with.
Wow.
When you think about
that, what masters we are.
What masters we are
at the communication.
But what our ancestors
are telling us is that
the language that we
are using to convey
that sacred acoustic vibration--
that language is really
where the action is.
So the English language
as well as many others
is based upon principles
of separation.
And that separation is
reflected in the ideas
that it embraces,
separate and isolated
thinking about things like you
versus me or them versus us.
We think about
winners and losers.
This is the language
of conflict and war.
Language based in
connection creates
a very, very different
kind of experience,
different kind of thinking.
A language based in
connection is unity thinking.
This is the language of
evolution, of community,
of cooperation.
So the bottom line to what
I'm saying to you here
is that we changed the language.
We changed the brain.
Or stated another way, change
the language, change the way
the brain accesses the matrix.
Well, these ideas are central
to the theme of the "Arrival."
And here's what I mean.
A growing body of
scientific evidence
now suggests that we
do not hold memory
in the neurons in our bodies.
We now know we have neurons in
the heart as well as the brain.
What these discoveries
are showing
us is that those neurons are
not what contain the memory,
rather the neurons we can
think of as biological antenna,
soft antenna that tune to
the place in the field,
in the matrix where our
memories actually reside.
Now, this idea is more
than just a metaphor.
It's more than just a theory.
What I'm saying
to you is so real
that engineers are
actually now beginning
to design the next generation of
computer chips based precisely
by this idea.
When engineers were working
with futuristic technologies,
they were saying, where
is our computer technology
going to go?
One of the things
they discovered
is that the silica that
we've used in the past
has limitations for the
amount of information
that can be stored
on that silicon chip.
So they began looking to nature.
Where in nature can
we find the material
that could contain the
vast amounts of information
that we're now
beginning to access?
And they chose water.
The new chips are actually based
upon a single droplet of water.
Now, this isn't tap
water from the bathroom.
It's highly refined, highly
structured water compressed
into a chip that interfaces
with the machine,
with the computer
as we know it today.
When the researchers began
filling these chips with
information, what happened was
there was so much information
that was being stored, they said
this droplet of water cannot
possibly store that
amount of information.
They were pumping tremendous
amounts, libraries
of information into this chip.
And the mystery was, where's
the information being stored?
And they realized that the
information was not confined
to the droplet of water.
The information was being
held in a field that is linked
to that droplet of water.
The information
was actually being
held in a field that extended
beyond the machine itself.
I know this is a very
different way of thinking,
but this is how we learn.
This is how science arrives
at the new understandings that
lead us to deeper
understandings,
perhaps the deepest
truths of our existence.
So the information doesn't
live in our brains.
It doesn't live in our hearts.
It doesn't live in our cells.
The information is stored
in the world around us.
And because of that,
the way we access
that information plays a
very, very powerful role
in our lives.
So I'd like to share a story.
And this is a true story of
precisely what the information
I just shared with you
means in our lives.
I live in an artist community,
a very creative community
in northern New Mexico.
A lot of artists--
visual artists,
sculptors, musicians,
writers all come
together in the beauty
of the high desert of
northern New Mexico
to create what they create.
And it's always been that way.
Georgia O'Keeffe, for example,
Ansel Adams made their home.
DH Lawrence.
They all made their homes
in this part of the world,
because it supports
this creative spirit.
Well, one of the interesting
things that I've seen
in my community-- and
if you're an artist,
you may have experienced
this as well--
is that a lot of
times the artists
have a hard time
supporting themselves
through their creations.
So they end up with
other jobs to make
the income that allows them
to create the things that they
love.
And the story I'm
going to share with you
is a story of precisely
such an artist.
But it relates to
the way information
is stored in the field and
what it can mean to a creation.
So I had a dear friend of mine--
musician, keyboard
artist who had just
created one of
the most awesomely
beautiful, mystical, compelling,
intriguing pieces of music
that I had ever heard.
And I said, well, I can't wait
until that becomes available.
Well, to my musician friend,
it wasn't ready for the world.
He said, I like what I've done.
He said, but it's not quite
ready for the world yet.
He says, I'm going to
take it in the studio
and do some more work.
So he would go into the studio.
He'd spend all of his
money, honing and refining
this masterful piece of work.
Then he'd run out of money.
And then he would spend six
months working in a restaurant
or in a bar somewhere, saving
enough money to go back
into the studio, so he could
work, and refine, and hone this
again, and again, and again.
This went on for over a year.
So I had a speaking event
in the Los Angeles area.
My friend picked me up at the
Los Angeles Airport at LAX.
And we got into the car,
and I turned on the radio.
And when I turned on the
radio, my friend's music
was playing on the radio.
Not the words to the
song, but the music
that he had been working
on, that he'd been
honing and refining for months.
And he looked at me.
And he said that's my song.
And I said, well,
that was your song.
I said the universe tapped
you on the shoulder.
The universe directed
you with inspiration.
You were given the gift of this
song to share with the world.
And you felt that the
world wasn't quite ready
or maybe the music wasn't ready
to share with the world yet.
But once you anchored your
creation in the field,
it wasn't held in the cells
of your brain or your heart.
It's in the field around us.
And what that means--
it's available for anyone
who is tuned into that
place in the field.
There are other creative
people out there,
creative people who are
reaching deep within themselves
to create something new, to
create something, a new, higher
expression of whatever it is.
And it is their
desire to create.
It is them reaching
within themselves
to create that actually allows
them access to the field
where your music was living.
So you didn't share your
music with the universe,
but the universe made sure
that it was out there.
And this was a very, very
powerful lesson for my friend.
I've had the same experience
when it comes to book titles,
for example.
I've anchored very, very
good titles for the books.
And I said, I'm not ready
to write that book yet.
Two months, three months
later, somebody else--
I look on Amazon.
And there is that book
title-- that exact book title
and even the same subtitle that
I never shared with anyone.
How did that happen?
It's in the field.
And the reason I'm sharing
this with you right now--
and I'm going to speak
directly to you--
is because each of you
have a creative impulse.
And when the universe gives
you the gift of a creation,
and taps you on the
shoulder, and says
here is something to
share with the world,
that inspiration
means the world is
ready for your creation
in that moment.
And I'm going to invite you.
Please share your
gifts with the world,
because we need what
you're creating.
You never know how your creation
is going to influence or impact
someone in this world when
you share it with them.
But the fact that you
have that inspiration
tells me that the world
is ready for whatever
it is you've created.
So please, share your
creations with the world.
When we create, here's
what's happening
on a biological level.
And this is going to be a
direct segue into the power
of language in our lives.
The act of you
creating, the act of you
reaching deep inside
of your being,
reaching deep to bring something
new forward, the act of you
striving to create
and become something
more in the next minute than
you were one minute ago--
that act is the
biological trigger
that is the impetus
for your neurons
to begin to wire in a way
that will support what it is
that you've chosen to create.
So let me just give
you an example of this.
I'm a musician.
I'm a guitar player.
I have been all my life,
since I was eight years old,
is when I began.
When I want to learn how to
play like another guitar player,
one of the most influential
guitar players in my life
was a man named Michael Hedges.
Michael Hedges passed
a few years ago.
He was a Windham Hill artist.
And I saw him live.
I saw him play live,
and I went up the stage.
And he took the
time to talk to me.
He was very kind to me--
had a very, very powerful
impact on my life.
Michael Hedges--
when I saw him play,
he blew all of the constructs,
all the rules of the way
I've been taught classically
to play a guitar.
He blew those rules
right out of the water.
He gave me the
freedom of expression.
And I respect him.
And I loved him so much.
I was so sorry when
he left this world.
So when I want to play
like Michael Hedges
and I listen to his
songs again and again,
at first it's very mechanical,
but there is a point.
And maybe you've
had this experience.
If you're trying to
learn a language--
French, or Spanish,
or you're trying
to solve mathematic
problem, you're
going through the motions.
And all of a sudden,
one morning you wake up,
and you're speaking French.
You're speaking Spanish.
You're thinking the language
of the mathematicians.
You're thinking the
language of Michael Hedges.
And all of a sudden, you know
where those cord progressions
work.
When that happens,
here's what you've done.
What you've done is
the act of you striving
to achieve that expression,
is what triggers the neurons
in your body to actually find
other neurons to grow and find
other neurons.
The image you're seeing
on your screen right
now is a single isolated neuron
looking for another neuron
that it can hook up with.
They're very social.
They want to hook
up these neurons.
And what you're
seeing on your screen
is what happens to many neurons
when you are doing this.
It is the act of you
striving to create
that triggers the neurons
to fire the way they fire.
This has a direct impact
and a direct consequence
when it comes to
language in the words
that we use to express
ourselves in our lives.
So one of the first
scientific links
to what I'm talking
about here-- the link
between the language that
we use and our biology,
the way that our
neurons fire-- was
made early in the 20th
century by a linguist.
His name was Benjamin Lee Whorf.
And the ideas that
Benjamin Whorf
shared in the world
of linguistics,
in the world of science-- they
were radical for his time.
What he said is this.
Number one, he said that the
way that we speak actually
influences the
way that we think.
But perhaps even
more importantly,
number two, he said the way
that we speak influences
what we think, that
our thoughts, what
we are capable of thinking
are actually linked to the way
our neurons are being wired.
One of the reasons that
Whorf came to this conclusion
is because of the
work that he was
doing with an indigenous
people in North America,
northern Arizona, the Hopi.
What he found was that
the language of the Hopi--
when that language
was translated
into English, what he
found is that the Hopi
have a very, very
different way of thinking
about us, about nature, about
our relationship to the world
and specifically about time.
So here we are back at time.
Time is the program
that allows us
to live our lives as we
do within the operating
system of the divine matrix.
What Whorf found was that
in the Hopi language,
they see everything as alive,
everything is connected,
everything is present and now.
From the Hopi perspective,
there are only
two realms of possibility.
One is the realm of things that
are manifesting in the present,
and one is the realm of things
that are already manifest.
The Hopi do not think
about time the way
that we think about time.
From their perspective,
the manifest
is everything that
has already happened,
to everything that we
can sense, everything
that we can experience.
It's what's already
occurred in the world.
From this perspective,
the manifesting
is what is unfolding
in this moment
and is actually
called in the language
the spirit of the breath.
It includes whatever is
unfolding in the moment now
as well as what's
possible in the future.
Now, these may seem like
insignificant changes
that I'm talking about between
the way that the Hopi think
and the way we
think, but they have
very powerful implications.
Let me talk to you
about the concept
of time in the Hopi language.
In Hopi, there is no
time as we know it.
There is only now.
And what Whorf found when he
was exploring the language
is that there were no
nouns in the Hopi language
to specifically refer to
the past or the future.
Everything is present.
Everything is
happening right now.
So for example,
the idea of a wave.
When we look at the
wave in an ocean,
we say look at that wave.
For the Hopi, it's
impossible to see
one wave in the moment in
time and call it a wave.
Because it is happening
now, the word is waving.
When they are looking at the
wave, we say look at the wave,
but we know there are
other waves out there.
The Hopi say that
the ocean is waving.
They actually have a word.
They say walalata, meaning
the plural waving is
occurring-- the plural waving.
So in a very real
sense, their language
is more accurate
than ours, describing
what the waves are
doing, although it
feels awkward to us, because of
the way we're wired to think.
So the Hopi are using the
same words to describe what is
or what has already happened.
They're describing a quantum
possibility that has already
become manifest, while
leaving the future open
for other manifestations
and other possibilities.
Well, when we look at
the movie the "Arrival"
from this perspective, it
opens up a whole new realm
of possibilities.
Because this is the
central theme to the movie.
In the movie, humankind, through
the language of separation,
was on the brink of
war, on the brink
of destruction in
the modern world,
because of the weapons we
have and the kind of war
that was possible.
And it's precisely at
this moment in time
when a new language is
introduced to the world.
Now, in the movie it happened
to come from another world,
and that was the ET perspective.
But there is a growing
body of scientific evidence
that suggests something
very similar to what
happened in the "Arrival"
has already happened here
on Earth that didn't
necessarily come
from another world in our time.
It may have been left
to us in the past.
Right now, there are 23
examples of ancient texts,
ancient languages that
were given to the people
of the Earth that to this
day cannot be translated.
We don't know what they say.
And the reason I'm
sharing this is
because just like the
indigenous language of the Hopi
is a language of connection.
And when the Hopi speak in
the language of connection,
it wires their brain
to see the world
from a place of connectivity,
of unity, of aliveness,
of cooperation.
It's very possible
that at least one,
if not many of
the languages that
have been left in the past,
provide precisely the same idea
with an alphabet that helps us
to find this place of unity.
And we go back and we think
about this growing body
of evidence that suggests
consciousness informs itself
through its creations.
The movie "Arrival" is
perhaps mirroring to us
what has already happened in our
past or the potential of what
we can embrace in
the future, simply
by recognizing the power of our
language to change our biology.
Such a different
way of thinking.
The power of the words
we use again and again
to trigger the
neurons in our brain
and in our heart to find other
neurons to wire together,
so that we become networks of
peace, networks of cooperation,
networks of unity, rather than
in networks of separation,
competition, and conflict that
we've achieved in the past
through the use of a
language that was given to us
a very long time ago.
So maybe it's no accident
that the movie "Arrival"
has arrived in our
world precisely when it
has arrived in our world.
Step back and look
at the big picture.
We're living a time of extremes.
We're living a time
unlike any time
in 5,000 years of recorded
human history when
huge natural cycles that
include the cycles of climate,
the cycles of economy, the
cycles of human conflict.
Each of them are
converging at the same time
into an experience that
we've never seen before.
And at the same time
that has happened,
the people of the world
are being pushed together
across the boundaries
that we've known
in the past of
oceans, of mountains,
the borders between countries.
People of the world
are coming together.
And we're learning
what it means to live
amidst different cultures,
different religions,
different ways of thinking,
different ways of treating men,
different ways of
treating women.
All of this is happening within
the context of the big picture
of these converging cycles.
At the very time
when our differences
have led to the brink
of war in the world
today, the very instant--
maybe it's no accident that
the movie "Arrival" arrived
to remind us of the
power of the language
to change the way we think about
ourselves and our relationship
to one another.
When we think about it
from that perspective,
in addition to being an awesome
movie and one of my favorites,
the question that
it begs for me--
and I'm going to invite you
to think of the same question.
If our words are a reflection
of what's happening in the world
and our words are
directing our biology
in the way our neurons
fire, what words
are you feeding into the field?
What words are you
feeding into the matrix?
What words are you using
to direct your biology?
And when you become
conscious of the language
that you're using
from this perspective,
it opens up a whole new
realm of possibilities.
And that is the power
of the divine matrix
and the power of
understanding our language
and the role of our language
to direct the possibilities
within that matrix.
Through the wisdom
preserved in some
of our most ancient and
cherished, indigenous
and spiritual traditions,
we can now think of language
as the user interface for the
operating system of our lives,
the divine matrix.
Well, in the next episode,
we'll dive directly
into the physics of the
matrix itself to discover
how to transform the hurtful
creations in our lives
and the healthy outcomes of
relationship and even healing.
I want to thank you for joining
me for today's program and be
sure to tune in to our next
all-new episode of "The Divine
Matrix--
Bridging Time, Space,
Miracles, and Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]